A GASOLINE USAGE COMPUTATION

The day of the 30c gallon of gas is gone. The day of the 40c gallon of gas is gone. The day of the 50c gallon of gas is gone. The 60c day is here. Soon there may be no gas at all. Consequently, an analysis of personal gasoline expenses is in order.

Many people keep logs of their gasoline purchases. Normally this data might include the date, the mileage indicated on the odometer, the brand of gas, the price per gallon, the number of gallons purchased, and the total cost. The price per gallon, the gallons purchased, and the total cost are all related; this relation will be slightly inexact because of small roundoff errors, but it can still be used to test input validity. Using a computer, you can calculate some other statistics. The derived quan- tities of interest include the average cost per gallon, the average miles per gallon, the average number of miles traveled per day, the average cost per mile, and the average amount of time that a gallon of gas stays in the tank. It would also be nice to have the same information arranged by brand to see if there are any differences among brands. Table 16-1 is a real gasoline log.

For the purposes of this problem, assume that each log entry refills the tank completely. The first entry establishes a base line for dates and mileages but cannot itself be used as data. Afterward each entry gives mileage and costs for the last tankful, showing the amount of gas replaced and the num- ber of miles traveled. It would also be interesting to print running averages over the latest short time period to see 1.f any short-term changes have occurred.

Statement of the Theme From data in a gasoline usage log, print a variety of control statis- tics giving the driver knowledge ofcar costs. Input data for each transaction should include the date, the brand, the odometer reading, the price per gallon, the gallons bought, and the total cost. Output should echo the input and also include the miles on the tank, the miles per gallon, the cost per mile, the cost per gallon, the cost per day, and the days per gallon. All these quantities should be calcu- lated per fill, on average over a short term, and on average since the beginning of the data. In addi- tion, collect the data for the brands and print out the averages for each brand. Do not limit the number of possible brands.

This program has no great difficulties. As with several other problems, there is some room for ingenuity in printing dollar amounts. The requirement that the number of brands not be limited implies a requirement that they not be named in advance. As a result, a simple
growing table of brands and their associated data will be necessary.

Orchestration Once again COBOL is an obvious candidate; this is exactly the type of task that the language was designed for. If you can find a report-generation language with sufficient power, here is a chance to learn how to use it. Otherwise use any procedural algebraic language.
